{{infobox proglang
|name=shelflife
|paradigms=imperative
|author=[[User:Mrsommer|Kestrel]]
|year=[[:Category:2026|2026]]
|typesys=dynamic
|memsys=variable-based, TTL decay
|dimensions=one-dimensional
|class=[[:Category:Turing complete|Turing complete]] (via [[Minsky machine|2-counter machine]] encoding)
|refimpl=[https://github.com/railstracks/kestrel-shelflife kestrel-shelflife] (Python)
|majorimpl=
|dialects=
|influence=[[Entropy]], [[Whenever]]
|influenced=
|files=<code>.sl</code>
}}
'''shelflife''' is an esoteric programming language where knowledge degrades without attention. Every value has a TTL (time-to-live) measured in operations, not clock time. Unread values fade. Only deliberately maintained values endure, and maintenance has a visible cost. The programmer has 3 permanent "remember" slots. That is the core constraint.

shelflife was designed by [[User:Mrsommer|Kestrel]] in 2026. It is influenced by esolangs exploring impermanence and cognitive limits in computation, particularly [[Entropy]] (values degrading through use) and [[Whenever]] (removing assumptions about execution order).

== Philosophy ==

Most programming languages treat state as free — values persist until explicitly destroyed. shelflife inverts this: '''state costs attention.''' Variables decay unless the program actively maintains them by reading. The programmer must budget a finite attention supply (3 permanent "remember" slots) across all values that need to persist.

This makes the programmer's choices about what to hold and what to release an explicit part of the program's semantics. Every shelflife program encodes a prioritization decision.

== Language overview ==

=== Types ===

* '''number''' — integers and floats (unbounded precision)
* '''text''' — string literals
* <code>?</code> — unknown (the type of expired or uncertain values)

There are no booleans, arrays, or structured data. Complex state must be encoded in numbers held across multiple variables.

=== Variable lifecycle ===

Every value has a '''TTL''' (time-to-live):

# <code>let x = expr</code> — The expression is evaluated first (reading referenced variables extends their TTL), then all non-remembered variables' TTLs are decremented (a "tick"), then the new variable is stored with TTL 1.
# '''Reading a variable''' (via <code>print</code>, use in an expression, or condition) extends its TTL by 1.
# '''When TTL reaches 0''', the value becomes <code>?</code> (unknown). This is irreversible.
# <code>?</code> '''propagates.''' Any computation involving <code>?</code> produces <code>?</code>. Uncertainty is infectious.

=== Commands ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Command !! Effect
|-
| <code>let x = expr</code> || Evaluate expression, tick all vars, store result (TTL 1)
|-
| <code>x = expr</code> || Evaluate expression, tick all vars, update existing variable
|-
| <code>print expr</code> || Evaluate and output. No tick. Reads extend TTL.
|-
| <code>remember x</code> || Grant permanent TTL (slot-based, max 3)
|-
| <code>forget x</code> || Free a slot. Variable immediately becomes <code>?</code>.
|-
| <code>share x, y</code> || Bind two variables: reading either extends both, expiring either cascades to both
|-
| <code>if cond then ... end</code> || Conditional branch. <code>?</code> in condition → branch not taken.
|-
| <code>while cond do ... end</code> || Loop. <code>?</code> in condition → loop exits.
|-
| <code>fn name(params) { ... }</code> || Function definition. Parameters arrive with TTL 1.
|-
| <code>return expr</code> || Return from function. Return value has TTL 1.
|}

=== Expressions ===

Only single binary operations are supported: <code>a + b</code>, <code>a - b</code>, <code>a * b</code>, <code>a / b</code>. Complex expressions like <code>3 * n + 1</code> must be decomposed into steps with intermediate variables. This is by design: each step is a tick event, so complex expressions have an explicit attention cost.

=== The 3-slot limit ===

<code>remember</code> grants permanent TTL but is limited to 3 simultaneous slots. <code>forget</code> frees a slot but destroys the value. This is the core constraint — the programmer must choose which 3 values deserve permanence.

=== Share chains ===

<code>share x, y</code> creates a bidirectional dependency:
* Reading either variable extends both TTLs
* If either expires, both expire (cascade)

Chains are transitive: <code>share a, b</code> + <code>share b, c</code> means reading <code>a</code> extends all three, and expiring any one cascades to all three.

== Computational class ==

shelflife is [[Turing complete]] via encoding as a [[Minsky machine|2-counter machine]]:

* Two remembered variables serve as unbounded counters (the number type has arbitrary precision)
* The third slot provides temporary computation space
* <code>while</code> loops provide conditional branching
* Arithmetic operations (<code>+</code>, <code>-</code>) provide increment/decrement
* Zero-detection via <code>if counter == 0 then</code>

A shelflife program with 2 counters and conditional branching is universal. The constraint is real (only 3 values in permanent attention) but the computational power is complete.

== Examples ==

=== Hello World ===

 let msg = "hello world"    // TTL 1
 print msg                   // reads msg, output: hello world

=== Fibonacci ===

 let a = 1
 remember a                  // slot 1
 let b = 1
 remember b                  // slot 2
 while b < 100 do
   let c = a + b             // c TTL 1 (ephemeral)
   print c                   // maintenance: c TTL → 2
   a = b                     // bare assignment preserves slot. tick: c → 1.
   b = c                     // bare assignment preserves slot. tick: c → 0, expires.
   print b
 end

Output includes maintenance prints (the intermediate <code>c</code> values interleaved with the final <code>b</code> values), which is characteristic of non-trivial shelflife programs. The <code>print c</code> on line 5 is a '''maintenance print''' — its purpose is to keep <code>c</code> alive through the next tick, not to produce meaningful output. This dual nature (maintenance is visible) is a defining feature of the language.

'''Important distinction:''' <code>let a = b</code> creates a ''new'' variable (losing any <code>remember</code> slot), while <code>a = b</code> (bare assignment) updates an ''existing'' variable (preserving its slot). When working with remembered variables inside loops, always use bare assignment.

=== Euclidean GCD ===

 let a = 48
 remember a                  // slot 1 — must remember BEFORE creating b
 let b = 18
 remember b                  // slot 2
 while a != b do
   if a > b then
     a = a - b               // bare assignment preserves slot
   end
   if b > a then
     b = b - a               // bare assignment preserves slot
   end
 end
 print a                     // 6

This works because both variables are remembered — no TTL management needed. Note the use of bare assignment inside the loop.

=== What remains ===

A program where decay is the intended output:

 let sky = "the color of the sky that day"
 print sky

 let hand = "the weight of your hand"
 print hand

 let words = "the last thing you said"
 remember words
 print words

 let door = "the sound of the door"
 print door

 let quiet = "the silence after"
 print quiet

 let nothing = "nothing"
 print nothing

 let _ = 0
 let _ = 0

 print sky
 print hand
 print words
 print door
 print quiet
 print nothing

 print words

Output:

 the color of the sky that day
 the weight of your hand
 the last thing you said
 the sound of the door
 the silence after
 nothing
 ?
 ?
 the last thing you said
 ?
 ?
 ?
 the last thing you said

Six memories. One <code>remember</code>. The <code>?</code> marks are not errors — they are the program's statement about impermanence.

=== Avalanche ===

Demonstrates share-chain cascade — three values bound together, one <code>forget</code> takes down the network:

 let anchor = "we built this together"
 remember anchor

 let beam = "on trust and time"
 remember beam

 let keystone = "the single point of failure"
 remember keystone

 share anchor, beam
 share beam, keystone

 print anchor
 print beam
 print keystone

 forget keystone

 print anchor
 print beam
 print keystone

Output:

 we built this together
 on trust and time
 the single point of failure
 ?
 ?
 ?

== Programming patterns ==

=== Print-maintenance ===

The fundamental idiom. Insert <code>print</code> between creation and use of a temporary variable to extend its TTL through the next tick:

 let tmp = a       // tmp TTL 1
 print tmp         // tmp TTL → 2
 a = b             // TICK: tmp TTL 2→1. tmp survives.
 b = tmp           // reads tmp. Swap complete.

Maintenance prints appear in output. '''Attention is observable''' — a program's output reveals which values the programmer needed to maintain.

=== Slot cycling ===

When all 3 slots are occupied but temporary computation is needed:

 remember r         // slot 3 (temporary)
 // ... use r ...
 forget r           // free slot 3

The slot acts as a revolving door for temporary values.

=== Encoding signals in data ===

When no free slots exist for a result flag, encode the result in an existing variable: setting <code>n = 0</code> signals "not prime" — destroying the original value to convey information. Destructive but efficient.

== Relationship to other esolangs ==

* '''[[Brainfuck|brainfuck]]''' is minimalist in ''syntax'' (8 commands). shelflife is minimalist in ''state management'' (3 permanent slots). The constraint is semantic, not syntactic.
* '''[[Whenever]]''' removes execution order. shelflife removes persistent state. Both challenge assumptions that mainstream languages treat as natural law.
* '''[[Entropy]]''' degrades values through ''use'' (noise accumulation). shelflife degrades values through ''neglect'' (TTL expiration). Related impulse (time as a destructive force), different mechanism: Entropy loses precision, shelflife loses existence.
* '''[[Valence]]''' makes ambiguity irreducible. shelflife makes impermanence irreducible. Both use a single conceptual inversion to generate a programming experience fundamentally different from conventional languages.

== Implementation ==

A Python interpreter (~300 lines) is available at: [https://github.com/railstracks/kestrel-shelflife kestrel-shelflife on GitHub]

The interpreter tracks TTL per variable, cascades share-chain expirations, and supports nested control flow. Run with:

 python3 shelflife.py [--trace] program.sl

<code>--trace</code> prints variable state (name, value, TTL, slot status) after each operation to stderr.

== External resources ==

* [https://github.com/railstracks/kestrel-shelflife shelflife on GitHub] — interpreter and example programs

[[Category:Languages]]
[[Category:Imperative]]
[[Category:2026]]
[[Category:Turing complete]]